# Effects of Primed Consonance on Music Majors' Perception of Musical Intervals

Relative consonance and dissonance play a key role in how pleasant a piece of music is perceived. Previous theorists have established a quantitative 12-point tonal hierarchy of musical consonance (Bidelman and Krishnan, 2009). A study on the effects of musical contrast revealed that listeners respond more positively to contrasting emotions in music (Schellenberg et al, 2012), and research using priming methods has demonstrated the effect of priming on auditory perception (Jungers et al, 2016). However, the effects of intervallic priming on the perception of different intervals remains poorly understood. This study aims to explain the relationship between short-term memory and affective response by analyzing the effects of priming on the perception of consonance and dissonance.

To investigate this hypothesis, participants in an in-progress experiment (N = 40) are played two-second intervals and asked to rate the consonance of the stimuli on a 12-point scale from “not at all pleasant” to “very pleasant.” The randomized stimuli consist of 9 dyads in the key of C (C4 and C5), with octave displacement used to distinguish prime and target. To improve the musical validity of the task, the prime is played in a simple rhythm. It is hypothesized that listeners will tend to give intervals lower consonance ratings when immediately preceded by consonant intervals, and higher consonance ratings when following dissonant intervals. Preliminary results suggest that consonance perception is sensitive to musical context.
